Having looked at the longest common subword
and subsequence problem, we now look at a
closely related problem called Edit Distance.
So, the aim is to measure how similar two
pieces of texture, it is so called document
similarity problem. So, let us look at the
following two sentences; the first sentence
says the students who were able to appreciate
the concept optimal substructure property
and its use in designing algorithms. The second
sentence says the lecture taught the students
to appreciate how the concept of optimal substructures
can be used in designing algorithms. So, the
third sentence here indicates how one might
obtain one of these two from the other.
If you have used certain document preparation
systems which allow you to track changes,
it will typically indicate the changes between
one version of a document and other version
like this. So, here the green indicates letters
which have been, so if we called as version
1 and this version 2, then in going from version
one1 to version 2, what we have done is you
are introduced the letters in green. So, you
have inserted these characters, you have deleted
the letters marked in red with a line through
them and in this yellow we have replace. So,
we have replaced the t by v and an s by n.
So, we have 28 characters, we can count that
there are 28 characters which have been inserted
including spaces and other, 18 characters
have been deleted and 2 characters have been
substituted.
So, now, this can be a basis of measuring
how close two documents are to each other.
So, the edit distance with the minimum number
of edit operations required to transform one
document to another, so we have to define
what we mean by editing operations. So, let
us just start with very basic operation, either
you can insert a character or you can delete
a character or you can replace one character
by another one in one step.
So, replacing of course could be a think taught
of us deleting and inserting, so that could
be a two step operations, I delete the character
and then I insert the character I want. But,
I am going to allow changing one letter a
by b or s by t as a single operation. So,
in our example we claimed that 28 characters
were inserted, 18 were deleted and 2 were
substituted. So, the total number of changes
we made is 48.
If the edit distance is suppose be the minimum
number of changes, it cannot be more then
48, because they already shown that it is
possible to do in 48 characters, possible
to do it in more clever way less than 48.
So, the edit distance is at most 48 for the
two sentence that we shown earlier.
So, this distance is also called the Levenshtein
distance, because it was first proposed by
the Soviet, now Russian scientist called Vladimir
Levenshtein and this like the longest common
subsequence problem, it is extremely useful
in practice. So, the first thing is to suggest
spelling corrections. Now, if somebody types
something that is a wrong, then it is spelling
corrective will have to suggest the correct
word from the dictionary to replace it. So,
which word should the spelling corrective
choose?
So, one criterion for choosing is to identify
among all the words in the dictionary that
are possible which one is closest to the one
that has been typed. So, this can be measured
in terms of this edit distance and then that
menu will pop up saying did you mean to type
this. This also happens when you type queries
in search engines. So, if you type something
to Google, Google will sometimes change your
query to a word which is meaningful, because
it recognizes that you mistyped a name or
a concept.
We also said that the longest common subsequence
problem that we saw earlier is useful in Genetics,
in Bioinformatics and in the same way edit
distance also, if you want to compare the
genetic information in two different species,
then it is natural to become to compare them
in terms of the content of the DNA and DNA
are just long strips. So, you want to find
out how easy or difficult it is to transform
one piece of DNA to another and depending
on that we can tell whether two species are
closed to each other or not.
So, if you go back to the longest common subsequence
problem, so one way of thinking of longest
common subsequence is supposing I just delete
all the parts which are not part of the LCS,
so I had things like bisect and secret. So,
now, in this if I deleted the b and i from
here and the r and e from here, then I am
left with exactly the longest common subsequence.
The other way of thinking about it is let
identity, I start with one word and I am transforming
it to this word, so I first delete the b and
i and then I insert here the r e.
So, I do not operate on both words and delete
from both, I operate only on the first word.
So, I delete the words, I delete the letters
I do not want, because I not have a second
word and I insert the letter, so I do want
which are there in the second not in the first
and in this way I transform the first word
to the second word and this is equivalent
to deleting from both and come it to a common
subsequence. So, this tells us that LCS is
somehow equivalent to computing the edit distance,
if I only allow delete and insert. So, the
interesting thing about edit distance is that
it also allows a substitution of one character
and other. So, it might give us a slightly
different metric from longest common subsequence.
So, going back to longest common subsequence,
it says that if two letters match at the beginning
of a word, then it is useful to assume that
the common subsequence includes that. So,
I have this one which says that a i is equal
to b j, so I include this in my subsequence
and then I solve the rest of the problem.
Otherwise, I take the max of the two sub problems
that I get by dropping a i or b j.
Now, in the edit distance problem we have
a similar criterion, if a i is equal to b
j, then I have nothing to do. So, the edit
distance of word starting at i and j is the
same as the edit distance starting at i plus
1 j plus 1. Recall that we are now doing the
opposite of longest common subsequence, we
are now trying to minimize the number of changes
in order to maximize the number of matches.
So, if we see that something is already matched,
then no changes needed, so we just move ahead
to the next position.
Now, if they do not match now three things
are possible, so I have a i, a i plus 1 and
so on and I have b j, b j plus 1 and so on.
So, in the first thing I can do is I can directly
make this into b j, in which case I have now
made the first letters exactly equal and so
I just need to look at i plus 1 j plus 1.
The other thing which I can do is to remove
this a i all together, I just remove this
a i. So, now, this disturbance is gone, but
I am still left to the rest to the problem,
so now, I have to now see if i plus 1 onwards
matches j onwards.
And finally, the last thing which I could
have done is to introduce that this b j at
the beginning, so now, this means that these
two things now match up. So, now, I have to
look at a i onwards and b j plus 1 onwards
and whichever of these three requires the
minimum work overall is the one i want. So,
I want to take 1 plus in the solution i plus
1 j plus 1 or 1 plus solution i plus 1 j or
1 plus solution for i j plus 1 and take the
minimum of these three.
So, this gives us the final inductive structure
that we want. So, ED the Edit Distance for
the word starting at i and j, if a i is equal
to b j it is ED of i plus 1 j plus 1. If it
is not equal, then it is 1 plus the minimum
of the edit distance of these three different
sub problems and as usual we extend this to
m plus 1 n plus 1, but the interpretation
is now different. If one of the words is empty,
then the number of changes I need to make
is to transform everything else or insert
everything from that word you use.
So, if I am looking at b j, b j plus 1 to
b n and beside I have nothing, then what is
the edit distance. Well, I have to basically
insert this many letters. How many letters
are there? N n minus j plus 1, so the edit
distance when u is empty and v has z position
j is n minus j plus 1. Likely, likewise b
is empty and u is not, it is n minus i plus
1, we have to insert all those like this.
So, this is a slight difference, it is not
zero, but it is the cost of using up the letters
which are there, which are missing in this
word.
So, the inductive substructure in edit distance
is exactly the same as in LCS. Every position
depends on i plus 1 j plus 1 and the i plus
1 j and i j plus 1. So, we have the same three
neighbors depended C that we had as we did
before and us usual we can start at the bottom
right corner and work backwards row by row
or corner by corner. So, in this case remember
that the boundary condition is not zero, but
it is n minus j plus 1, so as I go up, the
number increases.
So, this is my boundary and now I can just
apply my recursive thing which says that t
matches, for edit distance at t is zero, because
I have nothing to do and there is nothing
to beyond them. Everywhere else, because I
do not match, the edit distance is just going
to be the minimum of the remaining three.
So, it is minimum to the remaining three plus
1, so in this case if I pick, look at this
for example, the minimum of 0, 1 and 2 is
0 plus 1 is 1.
The minimum of 4, 2 and 3 is 2, plus 1 is
3 and so on, so it is the minimum of those
plus 1 to make the current. So, I keep doing
this and I go left, eventually I will find
that the minimum edit distance between bisect
and secret is actually 4, I need to make four
changes, just using the inductive definition
that we have done earlier. And as before now
the question is how do I recover the solution
from this, so I follow the path. So, why did
I get a 4 there, because it is the minimum
of it is three neighbours and b is not equal
to s. What is the minimum of these three?
It is 3, so I went back.
Similarly, why is this 3 here, because this
is the minimum of these, so I went down. So,
every time I go down, it amounts to saying
that I go from i j to i plus 1 j and if you
remember in our case, i plus 1 j and i i is
corresponding to deleting. Similarly, at this
place I go a right. This means I go from i
j, i j plus 1, this corresponds to inserting.
So, what I can read of from here is that when
I am going to delete this v, I delete this
i, then I come here, I insert this r and I
insert this e. And these are exactly the four
changes that I need to make in order to transform
bisect into secret.
So, the pseudo code for every distance is
very similar to the longest common subsequence.
The only major change done is in the initialization,
the values at the boundary are not zero, but
whatever is required to complete the editing.
Then, as usual I start at the bottom right
end and I do columns in right to left rows
from bottom to top, if the current value if
the two values that I am looking at u of r
and v of c are the same, then I just postponed
the edit distance to the next thing, I have
nothing to do here. Otherwise, I take the
minimum of the subproblems and add 1 for the
current changes and finally, I have returned
the value 0 and 0.
The complexity is order m times n, it is exactly
the same as the previous one, because after
we fill up this table of size m times n and
it takes a constant time to compute. Now,
in all these three problems there is another
issue which we have not addressed. So, let
us deal with it now.
So, this is a space complexity. So, we have
this table that we have to compute which we
have a green is m times n, but notice that
the way we computed it for example, was to
compute this column, then this column, then
this column and so on. So, at any given point,
when I am computing this second column for
example, I only read the first column. When
I need the third column, this column is now
not needed anymore, because the third column
depends only on the second column from the
right.
So, if I need, if I fill column by column
I only need the next column, the column on
my right and the current column or if I need
row by row, the next row and the current row.
So, in other words while I’m just keeping
two columns or two rows, I can completely
compute this thing back to 0 0. So, therefore,
there was actually no need to rule m times
n size table as storage. I still have to compute
n times, but the time complexity remains m
times n. So, time is m times n what we are
saying is that this space can be reduced if,
let us say that n is the smaller of the two,
this space can be reduced topper n by just
keeping two columns.
And now you might ask how do I recover the
solution, because in the solution I trace
back the path on the whole thing, well you
can actually keep track incrementally as you
are going, you can build up the solution associated
to each entry incrementally, so even that
can be done in order n space. So, you do not
need this table at all even to compute back
the witness for the given numerical solution.
So, in all these problems where we have a
very limited neighborhood dependency in our
dynamic programming, you can actually often
make do with much less space, than it seems
to require in terms of the actual table as
given to you.